---
layout: post
title: "My thoughts on gnome3, unity.."
date: Wednesday, 11 Jul 2012 01:35:33 AM IST

comments: true
---
# My thoughts on gnome3, unity..

The huge number of touch devices in market is making ui developers optimize
their apps for all those touch and mobile devices. One thing they don't
understand is how screwed up the app becomes for a developer on a normal
workstation. I'm talking about gnome 3..

Gnome was my first desktop when I started using computers late 2009. I was happy
with it and used it till the early releases of gnome3. I hate it with passion
from then. There was "gnome classic" on my Debian sid for a long time but it
felt buggy and clumsy. My network manager never worked, apps crashed very often
and it was an overall mess!

Why am I saying this now? Recently [they removed the tree
view](http://git.gnome.org/browse/nautilus/commit/?id=ef467c8775392d0f0feb0e38f7a80f2d41719d84),
[they removed nautilus extra
panes](http://git.gnome.org/browse/nautilus/commit/?id=b8d5b4a7bcf47ed34a6343c95bcc3b079255c0a0). It
really annoy me because when I moved to xfce I really missed that feature in
thunar. It let copying between multiple locations a bliss, and not anymore.

Whats wrong here? They just don't understand that they **CAN'T** run the same
thing on a touch device and a desktop.[It does annoy
people](http://amplicate.com/hate/gnome3). [Linus said he hates it and moved to
xfce](https://plus.google.com/102150693225130002912/posts/UkoAaLDpF4i). It
became so unusable so that the mint guys forked it, made
[cinnamon](http://cinnamon.linuxmint.com/) and its such a beautiful thing to
use. Mint even became the most popular distro in the planet.

There was no reason to remove the bottom bar with minimized windows. I always
used my tab key for switching apps.I never used it actually, but that tiny bar
there told me about all open apps. Why save that tiny space there making it
really harder to use?

Linus in this [talk](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XpnKHJAok8) said subversion
is the most pointless project ever. Sorry, I have to disagree. Its unity.
Subversion surely comes just after it. Why did they remove the quick launcher
icons on the top panel? Because its very hard to touch with your fingers. But at
the same time, its really easy to do that with a mouse. Why do you have to go to
a corner of a screen to do *everything* that can be done with a GUI? Removing
C-A-t was like killing me. I must be pressing that over a million times
everyday. Gnome 3 have serious usability issues. It might work for an idiot
clicking his mouse here and there but not for a developer. Gnome3 just cant be
customized. It cant minimize. Needs too many clicks to get things done.

Seems like windows 8 is going in a very similar path. I wont be surprised to see
all of them, unity, gnome and windows dead soon.

I moved to xfce, and I am happy with it :)

I found few more people with a very similar thoughts [here](
http://felipec.wordpress.com/2011/06/16/after-two-weeks-of-using-gnome-3-i-officially-hate-it/),
[here](http://blog.taz.net.au/2011/11/27/some-more-reasons-to-hate-gnome-shell/)
and
[here](http://www.zdnet.com/blog/virtualization/i-hate-unity-i-hate-gnome-i-hate-windows-8-the-ultimate-desktop-search-continues/4089)
