---
layout: post
title: Papers we love, going forward
---

I started
the [Bangalore Chapter](http://www.meetup.com/Papers-we-love-Bangalore/)
of [Papers we love](http://paperswelove.org/)
with [Ramki](https://rkrishnan.org/) almost 2 years ago - a community that loves
to read academic computer science papers and meet once in a few weeks to discuss
them.

We've been mostly bottlenecked by the availability of speakers, and haven't had
a meeting in almost 6 months now. In an attempt to rekindle the group, I'm
reposting here the email I sent to the group today morning to get some
visibility and feedback.

>
>
> We haven't had a meeting in over 6 months now and it needs to be addressed very
> seriously right now. I'd like to know a bit more about the issues.
>
> I assume a lot of us are still reading papers, and the main question would
> be - "What are the factors that prevent you from talking?". I've a few
> observations and suggestions.
>
> 1. I think we've unknowingly set the bar too high. Talking about Shor's
>    algorithm is not for everyone - heck I didn't even understand most of it. If
>    you have an interesting paper to talk, its OK even if its not as
>    groundbreaking as Shor's or RAFT.
>
>    I hope to lower the bar a bit. Let's talk about simpler things too. We have
>    to make this community approachable and accessible to a lot more.
>
> 2. Let's experiment with shorter TED style talks. I've been reading a lot of
>    papers these days, but none of them can be stretched to a good 1hr talk like
>    we used to have before. But I can talk about a whole bunch of things in 15m.
>
>    Here are a few examples:
>
>    1. Consistent Hashing
>    2. Slab Allocator by Jeff Bonwick
>    3. Fast String Searching by Andrew Hume and Daniel Sunday
>    4. Kademlia or Chord
>
>    There are a few topics I'd love to hear about. I'm not the best guy to talk
>    about any of these.
>
>    1. Kqueue - There us a brilliant paper by Jonathan Lemon of FreeBSD
>    2. C4 Garbage collector - Can we find someone from Azul, Bangalore?
>    3. CAP theorem
>    4. Dynamo - A personal favorite paper
>    5. Spanner, Chubby or any classic infrastructure paper from Google
>
>    A few potential speakers, please feel free to volunteer now.
>
>    1. Erlang/Beam internals - Vipin?
>    2. GlusterFS - Ramki
>    3. Anita - The million things she can talk about :)
>    4. Haskell  - Maybe Rahul Muttinenni
>
> And to begin with, I'm scheduling a session 2 weeks from now, on Dec 3rd
> Saturday. I'm can do a ~20m session on Consistent Hashing. I hope few more will
> volunteer this time. 3 or 4 15-20m talks would be great.
>
> Please add your concerns here. You can drop me an email privately if you prefer
> to do so.
