---
layout: post
title: What did I do at Recurse Center?
---

Today is my last day at the [Recurse Center][RC] and I want to take a moment to
talk about what I did here. I came here with [big plans][plan] and then ended up
doing something [completely different][lessons].

For me, RC was about exploring so many little things that its very hard to even
explain what I did here. There were some major projects, but now in retrospect,
that is only a small part of the whole experience. I learned x86 assembly,
profiled CPU cache sizes; wrote some C, Rust, Erlang, Scheme and lots of
Haskell. I got ridiculously frustrated when my Haskell code was segfault due to
poorly written C++ FFI and when my silly combinatorial grammar went into a left
recursive infinite loops. I had so much fun learning about the memory layout of
a Linux process and how kernel does memory management. I learned a great deal
about compilers in general. LLVM was an intimidating mountain in the beginning,
but now we are friends. I still don't know shit about machine learning.

You get the point. Its a whole lot going on here!

One of the little traditions here is to write a simple check in as often as you
can and I'm sharing here all of them I wrote. I'm not even going to format them
excessively to make them look pretty or anything. There might be things you
agree, disagree and hate. But this is what I went through and I'm very happy
about all of it.

---
{% include_relative checkins.md %}
---

[rc]:      https://recurse.com
[plan]:    /2017/04/01/rc.html
[lessons]: /2017/07/04/compiler.html
