---
layout: post
title: Surely You're Joking, Mr Feynman!
---

I read the book [Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!: Adventures of a Curious
Character][book] almost 2 years ago and I wrote this review back then.

> This one made me think a lot and it was worth the time and effort.
>
> Feynman is a curious character indeed, but the book paints a slightly sad
picture about one of the greatest physicists of all times. It could be the book,
or maybe he was truly the man the book tries to portray. A great storyteller
indeed - there is an intentional feel of a fairy tale somewhere in there.
>
> His curiosity towards life, the experiments and the broad range of interests
is something worth imitating. His love for science makes you a bit jealous. The
playful nature - calculating the equations that govern the wobble of a plate
thrown into the air is something that would be of no benefit in the short run,
but that eventually got him the Nobel Prize.
>
> Arlene. They married after she got diagnosed with tuberculosis and the book
gives an idea that they must have been married for about 5 years when he moved
to Los Alamos for Manhattan Project.
>
> First of all, I don't understand how someone can be 300km away when his wife
is in such bad state. She is in hospital dying when he moves to the lab, and
Feynman is trying to get a room opposite to the ladies' dorms so that he can
keep looking at them. The book goes at length about hitting on women and his
general tendency to objectify women and use them for his benefit without even
treating them as fellow beings. The way his wife's death gets sandwiched between
a tale about tires and a tale about clocks left me deeply disturbed.

I know the last paragraph is a bit too harsh and ends abruptly - which is why
this draft was left unpublished for over 2 years. I would probably write
something very different today. Maybe you should read this excellent
[review][review] by New York Times instead. Looking back at this 2 years later,
I can only imagine how frustrated I would have been just after reading the book.

What changed? I read this beautiful post [Love After Life: Nobel-Winning
Physicist Richard Feynman’s Extraordinary Letter to His Departed
Wife][brainpickings] by [Maria Popova][maria] and realized that I had an
extremely biased and skewed opinion about Feynman. It took me a long time to see
that I was wrong.

Surely, Mr Feynman is **joking** and I missed it completely. This is a time
before antibiotics was a thing - a few years before the first successful
penicillin trials. He must have known that his beloved wife is dying and his
inability to do something about it would have killed him too. The Second World
War is going on and he was working on one of the most critical projects. I
cannot comprehend the pressure on those engineers when literally the fate of the
planet is in their hands.

I just didn't realize that you can be the funniest when you are the most
serious. Maybe picking locks and staring out through open windows is all you can
do in such a situation. Sorry, Mr Feynman for the little grudge I carried with
me for 2 years.

[book]: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/5544.Surely_You_re_Joking_Mr_Feynman
[brainpickings]: https://www.brainpickings.org/2017/10/17/richard-feynman-arline-letter/
[maria]: https://twitter.com/brainpicker
[review]: http://www.nytimes.com/books/97/09/21/reviews/feynman-joking.html
