---
layout: post
title: My favorite rust function
---

My favorite rust function is [std::mem::drop][doc] which is used to free or
deallocate a value, similar to `free()` in C.

Quoting the docs from stdlib, This function is not magic; it is literally
defined as

```rust
pub fn drop<T>(_x: T) { }
```

How could a function definition with an empty body ever be useful?

Ownership and lifetimes are Rust’s most unique features and it gives you the
predictability and performance of static memory management without any of its
safety problems.

The [ownership rules][rules] are pretty simple.

1. Each value in Rust has a variable that’s called its owner.
2. There can only be one owner at a time.
3. When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

Calling a function moves the ownership of the arguments and if the called
function decides to do nothing with it, the arguments will be dropped - which is
exactly what we wanted!

Now this might seem like a hack, but it really is not. Most languages would
either ask the programmers to explicitly call `free()` or implicitly call a
magic `runtime.deallocate()` within a complex garbage collector.

The beauty of programming language design is not building the most complex
edifice like Scala or making the language unacceptably restricted like Go - but
giving the programmer the ability to represent complex ideas elegantly and
safely. Rust really shines in that regard.

> A language that doesn't affect the way you think about programming is not
> worth knowing.
― Alan J. Perlis

---

This post was edited after publishing, see the full [history] on github.

[doc]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/mem/fn.drop.html
[history]: https://github.com/jaseemabid/blog/commits/master/_posts/2019-10-11-drop.md
[rules]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.30.0/book/2018-edition/ch04-01-what-is-ownership.html#ownership-rules
