---
title: Furlough! What have I been up to?
layout: post
---

📣 **I’m taking a sabbatical from April 7th to May 31st**

This is a difficult time to operate a business and to help my company reduce costs, I’m taking a sabbatical for 8 weeks. Read more [here](https://techcrunch.com/2020/03/31/monzo-ceo-wont-take-a-salary).

This helps everyone at work 🤞 keep our jobs in the long term by saving some cost in the middle of the pandemic. I was a bit burned out and needed a break to go back to my side projects, read the books I’ve always wanted to and spend some time away from the usual routine. I’m looking at this as a win-win situation! I’m even learning to touch type properly!

This also means my friends can call me anytime and I’d be up for chat 🙌

Staying focused in a time like this is going to be really hard. I maintained [a public journal of what I did everyday](/2017/08/10/rc.html) during [Recurse Center](recurse.com) and it really helped me look back often and feel that I wasn’t completely wasting my time. I’m going to try that again for the next few weeks. I’d be happy (and surprised) if I manage to stay sane through this lockdown.

## April 7

And it begins.

## April 15

I'm starting to feel productive working on [Inc] regularly. I can pick up things in the morning without losing much context from the previous day. Having a larger fraction of the code in my head is definitely helping.

---

The mounts for my monitors arrived and my home office setup now feels cozy! 2 large monitors is great and I’ll find it hard to go back to tiny laptop screens.

## April 16

I usually stick with a very small set of tools to get work done but I revisited that list lately and added a few more. I needed better tools to stay organised and focused during the pandemic and so far this is helping.  I might migrate from the proprietary tools later as I find FOSS alternatives, but for now these are working well.

1. I switched from Emacs to [Zettlr](zettlr.com) for long form writing and markdown.  
I’ve used Emacs as my primary editor for almost 10 years now and I love it, but it’s starting to show it’s age quite often. I could spend a couple of days tweaking Emacs to do 80% of Zettlr, but often its just easier to pick a different tool. Its pretty, works well with a folder of text files and is robust enough.

2. Bookmarks with [raindrop.io](raindrop.io)  
Being able to add a note on why I’m bookmarking something is the killer feature™ I needed. I had hundreds of bookmarks I no longer needed in a clumsy folder called “refile” which I never looked at. I spent an hour or so deleting most of it and reorganising the relevant ones into a few folders and this feels like a much better way of organizing knowledge for the long term.

3. [Todoist](todoist.com) is my primary task manager.  
I really enjoyed the daily standups with my team and during the last few weeks, they were laser focused based on our JIra board. I’m trying to replicate that for personal work.

4. I switched my terminal to [Kitty](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty) from [alacritty](https://github.com/alacritty/alacritty) for better Unicode/Emoji support.

---

Last 2 days have been exhausting but productive. Some of the long term annoyances with the runtime got cleaned up - A prelude gets compiled with every program, a nice wrapper Object type around the naked pointers and rudimentary support for working with stdio. 

I’m not sure if I should use IO primitives from libc or if I could “cheat” with rust instead. Still not very clear here on how to proceed.

TIL Panicking in a Rust function called from C is mostly in the undefined behaviour territory. I’m hoping to replace the final bits of C in Inc with Rust soon, but I’m not very hopeful about this. Getting rid of an entire programming language would be glorious!

## April 17

Good day and most of it can be summarised by this patch Gargi and I wrote together. [Convert all expressions into A-Normal form before code generation](https://github.com/jaseemabid/inc/commit/d7f584f59ad)

After so many exciting release notes, I spent some time trying to make Rust analyzer work with Emacs. Its painfully slow for even a tiny project like Inc and I wish I spent my morning elsewhere. 

Off to build my Saturn rocket instead of spending any more time with a laptop today.

## April 20

I can’t remember the last time I went out for a walk, so I did that today. I never thought I’d enjoy a frozen cake from Tesco so much.

I’ve volunteered to help some friends with their algo prep interviews. Since there is a non trivial chance of pretty much anyone losing their jobs during the pandemic, this cannot hurt.

## April 21

I should charge my brother for tech support and donate it to charity. Not because I need the money, but that will force him to think clearly and would save us both lots of time.

Speaking of rabbit holes, how do you implement a good **LRU cache**?

A **doubly linked list + hashmap** solution feels a bit naive since,

1. There is a non trivial memory overhead of a struct + 2 pointers to maintain the linked list
2. Each insertion involves swapping the element with head, which is a lot of write overhead for each read. Specifically its updating random pointers that wont fit into CPU caches neatly like a small array or bit vector.
3. [Link lists are pretty awful for cache coherency](https://rust-unofficial.github.io/too-many-lists/). Jumping around randomly in your RAM leads to crappy performance.

Evicting the **oldest element from a small random set** like [Redis](https://redis.io/topics/lru-cache) seems pragmatic.  

Is there anything better? Keeping eyes open.

Searching for cache eviction lead me to [Caches: LRU v. random](https://danluu.com/2choices-eviction/) and then to [Network Protocols - For anyone who knows a programming language](https://www.destroyallsoftware.com/compendium/network-protocols)  by Gary Bernhard. I had no idea how Ethernet frames aligned with 7 bytes of literal 10101010.. before each packet and [then sleeps for a small while](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpacket_gap) after EVERY SINGLE ETHERNET PACKET. How did it take me 10years to learn that?

Other good reads of the day include [Git from the inside out](https://codewords.recurse.com/issues/two/git-from-the-inside-out).  

Over and out.

$ sleep 9.6 µs




<style type="text/css">
      h2 {margin-top: 60px;}
 </style>

[Furlough]: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/check-if-you-could-be-covered-by-the-coronavirus-job-retention-scheme
[Inc]: https://github.com/jaseemabid/inc
